<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-3-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The Abbey at Bury St. Edmund's.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sound a sennet. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cardinal</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">York</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Buckingham</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</b> to the Parliament.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I muse my Lord of Gloucester is not come:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>'Tis not his wont to be the hindmost man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whate'er occasion keeps him from us now.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Can you not see? or will ye not observe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The strangeness of his alter'd countenance?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With what a majesty he bears himself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How insolent of late he is become,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How proud, how peremptory, and unlike himself?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We know the time since he was mild and affable,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And if we did but glance a far-off look,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Immediately he was upon his knee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That all the court admired him for submission:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But meet him now, and, be it in the morn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When every one will give the time of day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He knits his brow and shows an angry eye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And passeth by with stiff unbowed knee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Disdaining duty that to us belongs.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Small curs are not regarded when they grin;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But great men tremble when the lion roars;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Humphrey is no little man in England.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First note that he is near you in descent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And should you fall, he as the next will mount.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Me seemeth then it is no policy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Respecting what a rancorous mind he bears</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And his advantage following your decease,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That he should come about your royal person</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or be admitted to your highness' council.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By flattery hath he won the commons' hearts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And when he please to make commotion,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>'Tis to be fear'd they all will follow him.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now 'tis the spring, and weeds are shallow-rooted;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Suffer them now, and they'll o'ergrow the garden</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And choke the herbs for want of husbandry.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The reverent care I bear unto my lord</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Made me collect these dangers in the duke.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If it be fond, call it a woman's fear;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which fear if better reasons can supplant,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will subscribe and say I wrong'd the duke.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My Lord of Suffolk, Buckingham, and York,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Reprove my allegation, if you can;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or else conclude my words effectual.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well hath your highness seen into this duke;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, had I first been put to speak my mind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I think I should have told your grace's tale.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Duchess, by his subornation,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon my life, began her devilish practises:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or, if he were not privy to those faults,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet, by reputing of his high descent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As next the king he was successive heir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And such high vaunts of his nobility,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did instigate the bedlam brain-sick Duchess</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By wicked means to frame our sovereign's fall.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Smooth runs the water where the brook is deep;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in his simple show he harbours treason.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The fox barks not when he would steal the lamb.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No, no, my sovereign; Gloucester is a man</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unsounded yet and full of deep deceit.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cardinal</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Did he not, contrary to form of law,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Devise strange deaths for small offences done?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And did he not, in his protectorship,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Levy great sums of money through the realm</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For soldiers' pay in France, and never sent it?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By means whereof the towns each day revolted.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Buckingham</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tut, these are petty faults to faults unknown.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which time will bring to light in smooth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Duke Humphrey.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lords, at once: the care you have of us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To mow down thorns that would annoy our foot,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is worthy praise: but, shall I speak my conscience,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our kinsman Gloucester is as innocent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From meaning treason to our royal person</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As is the sucking lamb or harmless dove:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The duke is virtuous, mild and too well given</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To dream on evil or to work my downfall.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah, what's more dangerous than this fond affiance!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seems he a dove? his feathers are but borrowed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For he's disposed as the hateful raven:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is he a lamb? his skin is surely lent him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For he's inclined as is the ravenous wolf.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who cannot steal a shape that means deceit?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take heed, my lord; the welfare of us all</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hangs on the cutting short that fraudful man. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Somerset</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Somerset</td>
							<td>All health unto my gracious sovereign!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td>Welcome, Lord Somerset. What news from France?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Somerset</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That all your interest in those territories</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is utterly bereft you; all is lost.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td>Cold news, Lord Somerset: but God's will be done!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside</i> Cold news for me; for I had hope of France</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As firmly as I hope for fertile England.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thus are my blossoms blasted in the bud</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And caterpillars eat my leaves away;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I will remedy this gear ere long,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or sell my title for a glorious grave. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>All happiness unto my lord the king!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pardon, my liege, that I have stay'd so long.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, Gloucester, know that thou art come too soon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless thou wert more loyal than thou art:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do arrest thee of high treason here.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well, Suffolk, thou shalt not see me blush</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor change my countenance for this arrest:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A heart unspotted is not easily daunted.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The purest spring is not so free from mud</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I am clear from treason to my sovereign:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who can accuse me? wherein am I guilty?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>'Tis thought, my lord, that you took bribes of France,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, being protector, stayed the soldiers' pay;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By means whereof his highness hath lost France.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Is it but thought so? what are they that think it?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I never robb'd the soldiers of their pay,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor ever had one penny bribe from France.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So help me God, as I have watch'd the night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ay, night by night, in studying good for England,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That doit that e'er I wrested from the king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or any groat I hoarded to my use,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be brought against me at my trial-day!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No; many a pound of mine own proper store,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because I would not tax the needy commons,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have I disbursed to the garrisons,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And never ask'd for restitution.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cardinal</td>
							<td>It serves you well, my lord, to say so much.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>I say no more than truth, so help me God!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In your protectorship you did devise</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Strange tortures for offenders never heard of,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That England was defamed by tyranny.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, 'tis well known that, whiles I was protector,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pity was all the fault that was in me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I should melt at an offender's tears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And lowly words were ransom for their fault.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless it were a bloody murderer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or foul felonious thief that fleeced poor passengers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I never gave them condign punishment:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Murder indeed, that bloody sin, I tortured</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Above the felon or what trespass else.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, these faults are easy, quickly answered:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But mightier crimes are laid unto your charge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whereof you cannot easily purge yourself.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do arrest you in his highness' name;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And here commit you to my lord Cardinal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To keep, until your further time of trial.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord of Gloucester, 'tis my special hope</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That you will clear yourself from all suspect:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My conscience tells me you are innocent.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah, gracious lord, these days are dangerous:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Virtue is choked with foul ambition</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And charity chased hence by rancour's hand;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Foul subornation is predominant</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And equity exiled your highness' land.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know their complot is to have my life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And if my death might make this island happy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And prove the period of their tyranny,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would expend it with all willingness:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But mine is made the prologue to their play;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For thousands more, that yet suspect no peril,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will not conclude their plotted tragedy.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beaufort's red sparkling eyes blab his heart's malice,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Suffolk's cloudy brow his stormy hate;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sharp Buckingham unburthens with his tongue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The envious load that lies upon his heart;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And dogged York, that reaches at the moon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose overweening arm I have pluck'd back,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By false accuse doth level at my life:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And you, my sovereign lady, with the rest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Causeless have laid disgraces on my head,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with your best endeavour have stirr'd up</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My liefest liege to be mine enemy:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ay, all you have laid your heads together--</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Myself had notice of your conventicles--</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all to make away my guiltless life.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I shall not want false witness to condemn me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor store of treasons to augment my guilt;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The ancient proverb will be well effected:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>'A staff is quickly found to beat a dog.'</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cardinal</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My liege, his railing is intolerable:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If those that care to keep your royal person</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From treason's secret knife and traitors' rage</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be thus upbraided, chid and rated at,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the offender granted scope of speech,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>'Twill make them cool in zeal unto your grace.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hath he not twit our sovereign lady here</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With ignominious words, though clerkly couch'd,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As if she had suborned some to swear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>False allegations to o'erthrow his state?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td>But I can give the loser leave to chide.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Far truer spoke than meant: I lose, indeed;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beshrew the winners, for they play'd me false!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And well such losers may have leave to speak.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Buckingham</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He'll wrest the sense and hold us here all day:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lord Cardinal, he is your prisoner.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cardinal</td>
							<td>Sirs, take away the duke, and guard him sure.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah! thus King Henry throws away his crutch</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before his legs be firm to bear his body.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thus is the shepherd beaten from thy side,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wolves are gnarling who shall gnaw thee first.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, that my fear were false! ah, that it were!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, good King Henry, thy decay I fear. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit, guarded.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lords, what to your wisdoms seemeth best,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do or undo, as if ourself were here.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td>What, will your highness leave the parliament?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, Margaret; my heart is drown'd with grief,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose flood begins to flow within mine eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My body round engirt with misery,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For what's more miserable than discontent?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, uncle Humphrey! in thy face I see</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The map of honour, truth and loyalty:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet, good Humphrey, is the hour to come</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That e'er I proved thee false or fear'd thy faith.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What louring star now envies thy estate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That these great lords and Margaret our queen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do seek subversion of thy harmless life?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou never didst them wrong, nor no man wrong;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And as the butcher takes away the calf</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And binds the wretch, and beats it when it strays,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bearing it to the bloody slaughter-house,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even so remorseless have they borne him hence;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And as the dam runs lowing up and down,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Looking the way her harmless young one went,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And can do nought but wail her darling's loss,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even so myself bewails good Gloucester's case</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With sad unhelpful tears, and with dimm'd eyes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Look after him and cannot do him good,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So mighty are his vowed enemies.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His fortunes I will weep; and, 'twixt each groan</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say 'Who's a traitor? Gloucester he is none.' <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt all but <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cardinal</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">York</b>; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Somerset</b> remains apart.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Free lords, cold snow melts with the sun's hot beams.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Henry my lord is cold in great affairs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Too full of foolish pity, and Gloucester's show</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beguiles him as the mournful crocodile</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With sorrow snares relenting passengers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or as the snake roll'd in a flowering bank,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With shining chequer'd slough, doth sting a child</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That for the beauty thinks it excellent.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Believe me, lords, were none more wise than I--</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet herein I judge mine own wit good--</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This Gloucester should be quickly rid the world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To rid us of the fear we have of him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cardinal</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That he should die is worthy policy;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But yet we want a colour for his death:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>'Tis meet he be condemn'd by course of law.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But, in my mind, that were no policy:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king will labour still to save his life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The commons haply rise, to save his life;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet we have but trivial argument,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More than mistrust, that shows him worthy death.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td>So that, by this, you would not have him die.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td>Ah, York, no man alive so fain as I!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>'Tis York that hath more reason for his death.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, my lord Cardinal, and you, my Lord of Suffolk,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say as you think, and speak it from your souls,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were't not all one, an empty eagle were set</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To guard the chicken from a hungry kite,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As place Duke Humphrey for the king's protector?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td>So the poor chicken should be sure of death.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Madam, 'tis true; and were't not madness, then,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make the fox surveyor of the fold?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who being accused a crafty murderer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His guilt should be but idly posted over,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because his purpose is not executed.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No; let him die, in that he is a fox,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By nature proved an enemy to the flock,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before his chaps be stain'd with crimson blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As Humphrey, proved by reasons, to my liege.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And do not stand on quillets how to slay him:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be it by gins, by snares, by subtlety,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sleeping or waking, 'tis no matter how,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So he be dead; for that is good deceit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which mates him first that first intends deceit.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td>Thrice-noble Suffolk, 'tis resolutely spoke.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not resolute, except so much were done;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For things are often spoke and seldom meant:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that my heart accordeth with my tongue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seeing the deed is meritorious,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to preserve my sovereign from his foe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say but the word, and I will be his priest.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cardinal</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But I would have him dead, my Lord of Suffolk,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ere you can take due orders for a priest:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say you consent and censure well the deed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I'll provide his executioner,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I tender so the safety of my liege.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td>Here is my hand, the deed is worthy doing.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td>And so say I.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And I and now we three have spoke it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It skills not greatly who impugns our doom. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Post</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Post</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Great lords, from Ireland am I come amain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To signify that rebels there are up</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And put the Englishmen unto the sword:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Send succors, lords, and stop the rage betime,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before the wound do grow uncurable;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, being green, there is great hope of help.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cardinal</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A breach that craves a quick expedient stop!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What counsel give you in this weighty cause?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That Somerset be sent as regent thither:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>'Tis meet that lucky ruler be employ'd;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Witness the fortune he hath had in France.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Somerset</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If York, with all his far-fet policy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had been the regent there instead of me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He never would have stay'd in France so long.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, not to lose it all, as thou hast done:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I rather would have lost my life betimes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than bring a burthen of dishonour home</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By staying there so long till all were lost.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Show me one scar character'd on thy skin:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Men's flesh preserved so whole do seldom win.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, then, this spark will prove a raging fire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If wind and fuel be brought to feed it with:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No more, good York; sweet Somerset, be still:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy fortune, York, hadst thou been regent there,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Might happily have proved far worse than his.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td>What, worse than nought? nay, then, a shame take all!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Somerset</td>
							<td>And, in the number, thee that wishest shame!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cardinal</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My Lord of York, try what your fortune is.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The uncivil kerns of Ireland are in arms</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And temper clay with blood of Englishmen:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Ireland will you lead a band of men,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Collected choicely, from each county some,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And try your hap against the Irishmen?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td>I will, my lord, so please his majesty.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, our authority is his consent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what we do establish he confirms:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then, noble York, take thou this task in hand.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am content: provide me soldiers, lords,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whiles I take order for mine own affairs.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A charge, Lord York, that I will see perform'd.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But now return we to the false Duke Humphrey.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cardinal</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No more of him; for I will deal with him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That henceforth he shall trouble us no more.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so break off; the day is almost spent:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lord Suffolk, you and I must talk of that event.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My Lord of Suffolk, within fourteen days</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At Bristol I expect my soldiers;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For there I'll ship them all for Ireland.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td>I'll see it truly done, my Lord of York. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt all but <b epub:type="z3998:persona">York</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, York, or never, steel thy fearful thoughts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And change misdoubt to resolution:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be that thou hopest to be, or what thou art</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Resign to death; it is not worth the enjoying:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let pale-faced fear keep with the mean-born man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And find no harbour in a royal heart.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Faster than spring-time showers comes thought</span>
									<br/>
									<span>on thought,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And not a thought but thinks on dignity.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My brain more busy than the labouring spider</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Weaves tedious snares to trap mine enemies.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Well, nobles, well, 'tis politicly done,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To send me packing with an host of men:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I fear me you but warm the starved snake,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, cherish'd in your breasts, will sting</span>
									<br/>
									<span>your hearts.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>'Twas men I lack'd and you will give them me:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I take it kindly; and yet be well assured</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You put sharp weapons in a madman's hands.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whiles I in Ireland nourish a mighty band,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will stir up in England some black storm</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall blow ten thousand souls to heaven or hell;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And this fell tempest shall not cease to rage</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Until the golden circuit on my head,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like to the glorious sun's transparent beams,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do calm the fury of this mad-bred flaw.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, for a minister of my intent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have seduced a headstrong Kentishman,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>John Cade of Ashford,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make commotion, as full well he can,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Under the title of John Mortimer.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In Ireland have I seen this stubborn Cade</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oppose himself against a troop of kerns,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fought so long, till that his thighs with darts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were almost like a sharp-quill'd porpentine;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, in the end being rescued, I have seen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Him caper upright like a wild Morisco,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shaking the bloody darts as he his bells.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Full often, like a shag-hair'd crafty kern,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath he conversed with the enemy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And undiscover'd come to me again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And given me notice of their villanies.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This devil here shall be my substitute;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For that John Mortimer, which now is dead,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In face, in gait, in speech, he doth resemble:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By this I shall perceive the commons' mind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How they affect the house and claim of York.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say he be taken, rack'd and tortured,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know no pain they can inflict upon him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will make him say I moved him to those arms.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say that he thrive, as 'tis great like he will,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why, then from Ireland come I with my strength</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And reap the harvest which that rascal sow'd;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For Humphrey being dead, as he shall be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Henry put apart, the next for me. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-3-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Bury St. Edmund's. A room of state.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter certain <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Murderers</b>, hastily.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Run to my Lord of Suffolk; let him know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We have dispatch'd the duke, as he commanded.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O that it were to do! What have we done?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Didst ever hear a man so penitent? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murder</td>
							<td>Here comes my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td>Now, sirs, have you dispatch'd this thing?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>Ay, my good lord, he's dead.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, that's well said. Go, get you to my house;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will reward you for this venturous deed.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king and all the peers are here at hand.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have you laid fair the bed? Is all things well,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>According as I gave directions?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>'Tis, my good lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td>Away! be gone. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Murderers</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sound trumpets. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cardinal</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Somerset</b>, with Attendants.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go, call our uncle to our presence straight;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say we intend to try his grace to-day.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If he be guilty, as 'tis published.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td>I'll call him presently, my noble lord. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Lords, take your places; and, I pray you all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Proceed no straiter 'gainst our uncle Gloucester</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than from true evidence of good esteem</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He be approved in practise culpable.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>God forbid any malice should prevail,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That faultless may condemn a nobleman!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pray God he may acquit him of suspicion!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I thank thee, Meg; these words content me much. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>How now! why look'st thou pale? why tremblest thou?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where is our uncle? what's the matter, Suffolk?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td>Dead in his bed, my lord; Gloucester is dead.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td>Marry, God forfend!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cardinal</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>God's secret judgment: I did dream to-night</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The duke was dumb and could not speak a word. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</b> swoons.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td>How fares my lord? Help, lords! the king is dead.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Somerset</td>
							<td>Rear up his body; wring him by the nose.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td>Run, go, help, help! O Henry, ope thine eyes!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td>He doth revive again: madam, be patient.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td>O heavenly God!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td>How fares my gracious lord?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td>Comfort, my sovereign! gracious Henry, comfort!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What, doth my Lord of Suffolk comfort me?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Came he right now to sing a raven's note,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose dismal tune bereft my vital powers;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thinks he that the chirping of a wren,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By crying comfort from a hollow breast,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can chase away the first-conceived sound?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hide not thy poison with such sugar'd words;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lay not thy hands on me; forbear, I say;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their touch affrights me as a serpent's sting.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou baleful messenger, out of my sight!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon thy eye-balls murderous tyranny</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sits in grim majesty, to fright the world.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Look not upon me, for thine eyes are wounding:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet do not go away: come, basilisk,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And kill the innocent gazer with thy sight;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For in the shade of death I shall find joy;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In life but double death, now Gloucester's dead.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why do you rate my Lord of Suffolk thus?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Although the duke was enemy to him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet he most Christian-like laments his death:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And for myself, foe as he was to me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Might liquid tears or heart-offending groans</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or blood-consuming sighs recall his life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would be blind with weeping, sick with groans,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Look pale as primrose with blood-drinking sighs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all to have the noble duke alive.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What know I how the world may deem of me?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For it is known we were but hollow friends:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It may be judged I made the duke away;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So shall my name with slander's tongue be wounded,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And princes' courts be fill'd with my reproach.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This get I by his death: ay me, unhappy!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be a queen, and crown'd with infamy!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td>Ah, woe is me for Gloucester, wretched man!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Be woe for me, more wretched than he is.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What, dost thou turn away and hide thy face?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am no loathsome leper; look on me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What! art thou, like the adder, waxen deaf?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be poisonous too and kill thy forlorn queen.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is all thy comfort shut in Gloucester's tomb?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why, then, dame Margaret was ne'er thy joy.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Erect his statue and worship it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make my image but an alehouse sign.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was I for this nigh wreck'd upon the sea</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And twice by awkward wind from England's bank</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Drove back again unto my native clime?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What boded this, but well forewarning wind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did seem to say 'Seek not a scorpion's nest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor set no footing on this unkind shore'?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What did I then, but cursed the gentle gusts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he that loosed them forth their brazen caves:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bid them blow towards England's blessed shore,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or turn our stern upon a dreadful rock</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet AEolus would not be a murderer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But left that hateful office unto thee:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The pretty-vaulting sea refused to drown me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Knowing that thou wouldst have me drown'd on shore,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With tears as salt as sea, through thy unkindness:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The splitting rocks cower'd in the sinking sands</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And would not dash me with their ragged sides,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because thy flinty heart, more hard than they,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Might in thy palace perish Margaret.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As far as I could ken thy chalky cliffs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When from thy shore the tempest beat us back,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I stood upon the hatches in the storm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And when the dusky sky began to rob</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My earnest-gaping sight of thy land's view,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I took a costly jewel from my neck,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A heart it was, bound in with diamonds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And threw it towards thy land: the sea received it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so I wish'd thy body might my heart:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And even with this I lost fair England's view</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bid mine eyes be packing with my heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And call'd them blind and dusky spectacles,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For losing ken of Albion's wished coast.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How often have I tempted Suffolk's tongue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The agent of thy foul inconstancy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To sit and witch me, as Ascanius did</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When he to madding Dido would unfold</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His father's acts commenced in burning Troy!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Am I not witch'd like her? or thou not false like him?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ay me, I can no more! die, Margaret!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For Henry weeps that thou dost live so long. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Noise within. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</b>, and many Commons.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It is reported, mighty sovereign,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That good Duke Humphrey traitorously is murder'd</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By Suffolk and the Cardinal Beaufort's means.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The commons, like an angry hive of bees</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That want their leader, scatter up and down</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And care not who they sting in his revenge.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Myself have calm'd their spleenful mutiny,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Until they hear the order of his death.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That he is dead, good Warwick, 'tis too true;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But how he died God knows, not Henry:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Enter his chamber, view his breathless corpse,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And comment then upon his sudden death.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That shall I do, my liege. Stay, Salisbury,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With the rude multitude till I return. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O Thou that judgest all things, stay my thoughts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My thoughts, that labour to persuade my soul</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some violent hands were laid on Humphrey's life!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If my suspect be false, forgive me, God,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For judgment only doth belong to thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fain would I go to chafe his paly lips</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With twenty thousand kisses, and to drain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon his face an ocean of salt tears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To tell my love unto his dumb deaf trunk,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with my fingers feel his hand unfeeling:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But all in vain are these mean obsequies;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to survey his dead and earthly image,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What were it but to make my sorrow greater? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</b> and others, bearing <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</b>'s body on a bed.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>Come hither, gracious sovereign, view this body.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That is to see how deep my grave is made;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For with his soul fled all my worldly solace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For seeing him I see my life in death.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>As surely as my soul intends to live</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With that dread King that took our state upon him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To free us from his father's wrathful curse,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do believe that violent hands were laid</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the life of this thrice-famed duke.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A dreadful oath, sworn with a solemn tongue!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What instance gives Lord Warwick for his vow?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>See how the blood is settled in his face.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oft have I seen a timely-parted ghost,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of ashy semblance, meagre, pale and bloodless,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being all descended to the labouring heart;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, in the conflict that it holds with death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Attracts the same for aidance 'gainst the enemy;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which with the heart there cools and ne'er returneth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To blush and beautify the cheek again.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But see, his face is black and full of blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His eye-balls further out than when he lived,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Staring full ghastly like a strangled man;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His hair uprear'd, his nostrils stretched with struggling;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His hands abroad display'd, as one that grasp'd</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tugg'd for life and was by strength subdued:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Look, on the sheets his hair you see, is sticking;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His well-proportion'd beard made rough and rugged,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like to the summer's corn by tempest lodged.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It cannot be but he was murder'd here;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The least of all these signs were probable.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, Warwick, who should do the duke to death?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Myself and Beaufort had him in protection;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we, I hope, sir, are no murderers.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But both of you were vow'd Duke Humphrey's foes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And you, forsooth, had the good duke to keep:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>'Tis like you would not feast him like a friend;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And 'tis well seen he found an enemy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then you, belike, suspect these noblemen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As guilty of Duke Humphrey's timeless death.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Who finds the heifer dead and bleeding fresh</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sees fast by a butcher with an axe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But will suspect 'twas he that made the slaughter?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who finds the partridge in the puttock's nest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But may imagine how the bird was dead,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Although the kite soar with unbloodied beak?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even so suspicious is this tragedy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Are you the butcher, Suffolk? Where's your knife?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is Beaufort term'd a kite? Where are his talons?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I wear no knife to slaughter sleeping men;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But here's a vengeful sword, rusted with ease,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That shall be scoured in his rancorous heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That slanders me with murder's crimson badge.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say, if thou darest, proud Lord of Warwick-shire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I am faulty in Duke Humphrey's death. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cardinal</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Somerset</b>, and others.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>What dares not Warwick, if false Suffolk dare him?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He dares not calm his contumelious spirit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor cease to be an arrogant controller,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though Suffolk dare him twenty thousand times.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Madam, be still; with reverence may I say;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For every word you speak in his behalf</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is slander to your royal dignity.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Blunt-witted lord, ignoble in demeanor!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If ever lady wrong'd her lord so much,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy mother took into her blameful bed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some stern untutor'd churl, and noble stock</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was graft with crab-tree slip; whose fruit thou art,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And never of the Nevils' noble race.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But that the guilt of murder bucklers thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I should rob the deathsman of his fee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Quitting thee thereby of ten thousand shames,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that my sovereign's presence makes me mild,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would, false murderous coward, on thy knee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make thee beg pardon for thy passed speech,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And say it was thy mother that thou meant'st</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thou thyself was born in bastardy;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And after all this fearful homage done,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give thee thy hire and send thy soul to hell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pernicious blood-sucker of sleeping men!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou shall be waking well I shed thy blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If from this presence thou darest go with me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Away even now, or I will drag thee hence:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unworthy though thou art, I'll cope with thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And do some service to Duke Humphrey's ghost. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What stronger breastplate than a heart untainted!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thrice is he armed that hath his quarrel just,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he but naked, though lock'd up in steel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose conscience with injustice is corrupted. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A noise within.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td>What noise is this? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</b>, with their weapons drawn.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, how now, lords! your wrathful weapons drawn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here in our presence! dare you be so bold?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why, what tumultuous clamour have we here?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The traitorous Warwick with the men of Bury</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Set all upon me, mighty sovereign.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To the Commons, entering</i> Sirs, stand apart;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>the king shall know your mind.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dread lord, the commons send you word by me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless Lord Suffolk straight be done to death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or banished fair England's territories,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They will by violence tear him from your palace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And torture him with grievous lingering death.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They say, by him the good Duke Humphrey died;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They say, in him they fear your highness' death;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And mere instinct of love and loyalty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Free from a stubborn opposite intent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As being thought to contradict your liking,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Makes them thus forward in his banishment.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They say, in care of your most royal person,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That if your highness should intend to sleep</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And charge that no man should disturb your rest</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In pain of your dislike or pain of death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet, notwithstanding such a strait edict,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were there a serpent seen, with forked tongue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That slily glided towards your majesty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It were but necessary you were waked,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lest, being suffer'd in that harmful slumber,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The mortal worm might make the sleep eternal;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore do they cry, though you forbid,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That they will guard you, whether you will or no,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From such fell serpents as false Suffolk is,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With whose envenomed and fatal sting,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your loving uncle, twenty times his worth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They say, is shamefully bereft of life.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Commons</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Within</i> An answer from the king, my</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lord of Salisbury!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>'Tis like the commons, rude unpolish'd hinds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Could send such message to their sovereign:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But you, my lord, were glad to be employ'd,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To show how quaint an orator you are:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But all the honour Salisbury hath won</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is, that he was the lord ambassador</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sent from a sort of tinkers to the king.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Commons</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Within</i> An answer from the king, or we will all break in!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go, Salisbury, and tell them all from me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I thank them for their tender loving care;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And had I not been cited so by them,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet did I purpose as they do entreat;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, sure, my thoughts do hourly prophesy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mischance unto my state by Suffolk's means:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore, by His majesty I swear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose far unworthy deputy I am,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He shall not breathe infection in this air</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But three days longer, on the pain of death. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td>O Henry, let me plead for gentle Suffolk!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ungentle queen, to call him gentle Suffolk!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No more, I say: if thou dost plead for him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou wilt but add increase unto my wrath.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had I but said, I would have kept my word,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But when I swear, it is irrevocable.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If, after three days' space, thou here be'st found</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On any ground that I am ruler of,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The world shall not be ransom for thy life.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, Warwick, come, good Warwick, go with me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have great matters to impart to thee. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt all but <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Mischance and sorrow go along with you!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Heart's discontent and sour affliction</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be playfellows to keep you company!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There's two of you; the devil make a third!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And threefold vengeance tend upon your steps!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Cease, gentle queen, these execrations,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let thy Suffolk take his heavy leave.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fie, coward woman and soft-hearted wretch!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hast thou not spirit to curse thine enemy?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A plague upon them! wherefore should I curse them?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would curses kill, as doth the mandrake's groan,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would invent as bitter-searching terms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As curst, as harsh and horrible to hear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Deliver'd strongly through my fixed teeth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With full as many signs of deadly hate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As lean-faced Envy in her loathsome cave:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My tongue should stumble in mine earnest words;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mine eyes should sparkle like the beaten flint;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mine hair be fixed on end, as one distract;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ay, every joint should seem to curse and ban:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And even now my burthen'd heart would break,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should I not curse them. Poison be their drink!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gall, worse than gall, the daintiest that they taste!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their sweetest shade a grove of cypress trees!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their chiefest prospect murdering basilisks!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their softest touch as smart as lizards' sting!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their music frightful as the serpent's hiss,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And boding screech-owls make the concert full!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All the foul terrors in dark-seated hell--</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Enough, sweet Suffolk; thou torment'st thyself;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And these dread curses, like the sun 'gainst glass,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or like an overcharged gun, recoil,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And turn the force of them upon thyself.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You bade me ban, and will you bid me leave?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, by the ground that I am banish'd from,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Well could I curse away a winter's night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though standing naked on a mountain top,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where biting cold would never let grass grow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And think it but a minute spent in sport.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, let me entreat thee cease. Give me thy hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I may dew it with my mournful tears;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor let the rain of heaven wet this place,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To wash away my woful monuments.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, could this kiss be printed in thy hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thou mightst think upon these by the seal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through whom a thousand sighs are breathed for thee!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So, get thee gone, that I may know my grief;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>'Tis but surmised whiles thou art standing by,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As one that surfeits thinking on a want.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will repeal thee, or, be well assured,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Adventure to be banished myself:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And banished I am, if but from thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go; speak not to me; even now be gone.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, go not yet! Even thus two friends condemn'd</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Embrace and kiss and take ten thousand leaves,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Loather a hundred times to part than die.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet now farewell; and farewell life with thee!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thus is poor Suffolk ten times banished;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Once by the king, and three times thrice by thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>'Tis not the land I care for, wert thou thence;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A wilderness is populous enough,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So Suffolk had thy heavenly company:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For where thou art, there is the world itself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With every several pleasure in the world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And where thou art not, desolation.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I can no more: live thou to joy thy life;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Myself no joy in nought but that thou livest. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Vaux</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td>Wither goes Vaux so fast? what news, I prithee?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vaux</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To signify unto his majesty</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That Cardinal Beaufort is at point of death;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For suddenly a grievous sickness took him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That makes him gasp and stare and catch the air,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Blaspheming God and cursing men on earth.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sometimes he talks as if Duke Humphrey's ghost</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were by his side; sometime he calls the king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And whispers to his pillow, as to him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The secrets of his overcharged soul;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I am sent to tell his majesty</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That even now he cries aloud for him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go tell this heavy message to the king. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Vaux</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ay me! what is this world! what news are these!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But wherefore grieve I at an hour's poor loss,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Omitting Suffolk's exile, my soul's treasure?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why only, Suffolk, mourn I not for thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with the southern clouds contend in tears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Theirs for the earth's increase, mine for my sorrows?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now get thee hence: the king, thou know'st, is coming;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If thou be found by me, thou art but dead.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If I depart from thee, I cannot live;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in thy sight to die, what were it else</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But like a pleasant slumber in thy lap?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here could I breathe my soul into the air,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As mild and gentle as the cradle-babe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dying with mother's dug between its lips:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where, from thy sight, I should be raging mad,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And cry out for thee to close up mine eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To have thee with thy lips to stop my mouth;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So shouldst thou either turn my flying soul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or I should breathe it so into thy body,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then it lived in sweet Elysium.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To die by thee were but to die in jest;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From thee to die were torture more than death:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, let me stay, befall what may befall!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Away! though parting be a fretful corrosive,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is applied to a deathful wound.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To France, sweet Suffolk: let me hear from thee;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For wheresoe'er thou art in this world's globe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I'll have an Iris that shall find thee out.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td>I go.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td>And take my heart with thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A jewel, lock'd into the wofull'st cask</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That ever did contain a thing of worth.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even as a splitted bark, so sunder we</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This way fall I to death.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td>This way for me. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt severally.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-3-3" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>A bedchamber.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">KING</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</b>, to the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cardinal</b> in bed.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td>How fares my lord? speak, Beaufort, to thy sovereign.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cardinal</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If thou be'st death, I'll give thee England's treasure,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Enough to purchase such another island,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So thou wilt let me live, and feel no pain.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah, what a sign it is of evil life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where death's approach is seen so terrible!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>Beaufort, it is thy sovereign speaks to thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cardinal</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Bring me unto my trial when you will.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Died he not in his bed? where should he die?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can I make men live, whether they will or no?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, torture me no more! I will confess.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alive again? then show me where he is:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I'll give a thousand pound to look upon him.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He hath no eyes, the dust hath blinded them.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Comb down his hair; look, look! it stands upright,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like lime-twigs set to catch my winged soul.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give me some drink; and bid the apothecary</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bring the strong poison that I bought of him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O thou eternal Mover of the heavens.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Look with a gentle eye upon this wretch!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, beat away the busy meddling fiend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That lays strong siege unto this wretch's soul.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And from his bosom purge this black despair!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>See, how the pangs of death do make him grin!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td>
							<td>Disturb him not; let him pass peaceably.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Peace to his soul, if God's good pleasure be!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lord Cardinal, if thou think'st on heaven's bliss,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hold up thy hand, make signal of thy hope.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He dies, and makes no sign. O God, forgive him!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>So bad a death argues a monstrous life.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Forbear to judge, for we are sinners all.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Close up his eyes and draw the curtain close;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let us all to meditation. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
